## Women in Systems Oncology

I had the privilege of attending the Symposium on Women in Systems Oncology on July 19-20, 2024, organized by IBAB in collaboration with the Param Hansa Center for Computational Oncology at IISC, Bangalore. The event was a remarkable convergence of pioneering women leaders in cancer research, showcasing their groundbreaking work and inspiring dedication.

## Day 1

### Lec 1: Using Artificial Intelligence for Cancer Screening
**Geetha Manjunath**  
*CEO and Founder-Niramai Health Analytix, Bangalore*  
Breast cancer is the largest cause of cancer deaths in women. Thermalytix is a novel breast cancer screening test using Artificial intelligence algorithms over thermal scans to detect early stage breast malignancies. The test is radiation free, non-invasive, affordable, portable, privacy aware and more sensitive than mammography for women of all ages. In this talk, the speaker shared the key details of Al algorithms has made cancer detection possible and challenges faced in taking an idea to become a cancer screening product.

### Lec 2: Alternative Splicing in Genes of the Sphingolipid Pathway: An Evolving Paradigm in Cancer
**Prof Ujjaini Dasgupta**  
*Amity Institute of Integrative Sciences and Health, Amity Institute of Biotechnology, Manesar*  
Global dysregulation of splicing has emerged as a vital player in cancer Alternative Splicing
(AS) regulates all cancer phenotypes like proliferation, apoptosis, invasion, metastasis multidrug resistance, angiogenesis, and metabolism that collaboratively lead to tumor progression. In recent years, sphingolipids have emerged as crucial regulators of cancer progression, and response to the anticancer treatments. The role of AS in regulating the expression of genes in the sphingolipid pathway are, however, still unexplored. Therefore, we identified AS events like cassette exon (CE) and intron retention (IR) in sphingolipid genes leading to differential transcript isoform abundance and dysregulation in sphingolipids that contribute significantly to cancer phenotypes We also aimed to decipher the impact of chemotherapy on sphingolipid metabolism through AS-mediated gene regulation.
Bioinformatic analysis of TCGA BRCA datasets identified breast cancer subtype-specific AS events and a splicing signature of sphingolipid genes in normal-like versus various breast cancer subtypes. From these signatures we identified a unique CE event in Ceramide Synthase 2 (CERS2) specific for the Luminal B subtype and another in UDP-glucose Ceramide Glucosyl transferase (UGCG) that her lab characterized to elucidate how they regulate phenotypes like cell proliferation and migration. She also showed how chemotherapeutic regimens modulate the level of ceramides and glucosylceramides (responsible for apoptotic cell death and drug resistance) through AS of sphingolipid genes. Her talk highlighted the importance of AS in sphingolipid metabolism that impacts cancer progression.

### Lec 3: Deciphering Epigenetic Reprogramming in p53 Deficient/Mutant Colorectal Cancer
**Prof Vijayalakshmi Mahadevan**  
*Institute of Bioinformatics and Applied Biotechnology (IBAB), Bangalore*  
Alterations in epigenetic modifications and chromatin structure are known to drive tumour initiation and progression. Colorectal cancer (CRC) shows 40-50% mutations in tumor suppressor p53 leading to higher metastatic potential and drug resistance. The clinical importance of p53 mutations in colorectal cancer emphasizes the need to understand the interplay between p53 signalling and epigenetic regulation in colon cancer. Towards this, she investigated the genome-wide enrichment profiles of several epigenetic marks using ChIP sequencing. Her genome-wide profiling of the enhancer mark H3K27 ac in p53 null CRC cells reveals an overall increase in sites that are occupied by H3K27 ac upon p53 loss and a greater occupancy at the promoters than at the distal intergenic regions. Active enhancers showed strong association with oncogenes and hallmark MYC targets suggesting an enhancer-mediated reprogramming of MYC pathway upon p53 loss. The loss of p53 was also accompanied by gain of super enhancers which functionally correlated with oncogenic expression. The genes associated with super enhancers were found to correlate with CMS4 subtype of colorectal cancer with low survival rates as observed in the TCGA-COAD cohort. These observations suggest an enhancer/super enhancer driven stemness and mesenchymal state in CRCs with the loss of p53. We also investigated the influence of p53 on TGFß induced epigenetic alterations on 4 different CRC cell lines with varying status of p53. Her observations on agonist and antagonistic relationships between EMT factors SNAI1 and SNAI2 with epigenetic enzymes KDM6/6B and the chromatin organizer SATB1 in p53 null CRC cells suggest a crosstalk between epigenetic and EMT factors. These approaches are poised to yield drug targets that can be targeted for epigenetic therapy in p53 mutant patients.

### Lec 4: [10x Genomics Presentation]
**Mr. Avid Hussain and Santosh Prasad**  
*10x Genomics, Inc.*  
10x Genomics, Inc. is an American biotechnology company that designs and manufactures gene sequencing technology used in scientific research. They provided a live demo of how to use CystAssist (Spatiotemporal imaging).

### Lec 5: Navigating Breast Cancer in Indian Women - Insights from Longitudinal Study
**Dr Jyoti Prabhu**  
*St. John's Research Institute, Bangalore*  
The incidence of breast cancer is steadily increasing in India, particularly among younger women and in urban centres. Our longitudinal studies and long-term follow-up have documented clinical presentation patterns and disease outcomes following standard treatments. This talk presented insights from molecular analyses, focusing on young premenopausal women and the unique tumour microenvironment in aggressive triple-negative breast cancer subtypes.

### Lec 6: Does Every Breast Cancer Patient Need Chemotherapy? Role of "Made in India" Innovative Tests in Decision Making
**Dr. Manjiri Bakre**  
*CEO - OncoStem Diagnostics Pvt. Ltd, Bangalore*  
As you may know, close to 2 lakh breast cancer patients are diagnosed every year in India and it is also the biggest cause of cancer-related deaths in women. Today about 95% of breast cancer patients are treated with chemotherapy, but a vast majority (~70%) of early stage (Stage I/II) breast cancer patients do not benefit from chemotherapy. The side effects of chemotherapy are very painful for the patient and bring down quality of life tremendously besides being a monetary drain. This devastating fact motivated her to develop India's first AI-based flagship prognostic test "CanAssist Breast" which helps clinicians to understand which patient needs/benefits from chemotherapy versus not. This in turn helps clinicians to plan a personalized treatment with patients with or without chemotherapy. OncoStem Diagnostics is a Med Tech start-up based out of Bangalore. In her talk, she discussed briefly about CanAssist Breast and showcased how an Indian start-up company can make a difference in the lives of our patients.

### Lec 7: Integrating Ayurveda in Cancer Treatment: Initiating Molecular Dialogues through Ayurgenomics
**Dr Mitali Mukerji**  
*Department of Bioscience & Bioengineering, School of Artificial Intelligence and Data Science (AIDE), Indian Institute of Technology - Jodhpur*  
We are currently witnessing a paradigm shift in cancer treatment, transitioning from a reactive stance to a more proactive, holistic, and precise approach. This approach resonates with the principles of Ayurveda, practiced in India for thousands of years. However, the decision to opt for Ayurveda as an additional medical option often rests with patients who possess limited understanding and evidence. One of the challenges lies in the limited communication between Ayurveda and modern medicine practitioners. Integrative medicine aims to provide informed choices for cancer management, drawing from multiple systems of medicine. However, the existing gap necessitates the development of comprehensive frameworks that facilitate communication between these disciplines and offer evidence-based solutions grounded in the principles and applications of traditional medicines. The science of Ayurgenomics has initiated molecular dialogues between these streams. Ayurgenomics provides an operational framework to (a) bridge the ontologies of Ayurveda and modern medicine through genomics approaches, (b) identify biomarkers for early actionable interventions and risk stratification, (c) comprehend genetic individuality influencing variable drug and environmental responses from a systems perspective, and (d) elucidate the mechanisms underlying Ayurveda-specific interventions and explore repurposing possibilities. These can also be extended to offer evidence-based solutions for other traditional medicine practices, including yoga and meditation. At the Ayurtech Centre of Excellence, they are integrating different disciplines of engineering sciences to bridge the gap between traditional and modern healthcare with a holistic approach. This approach not only provides a win-win situation but also enables the development of rigorous standards for the evidence-based practice of traditional medicine. The key benefits of integrative medicine will be discussed in the context of personalized cancer care in this presentation.

### Lec 8: [Hands-on Workshop on the Genomics of Cancer]
**Conducted by AWS**  
*AWS*  
The day concluded with a hands-on workshop conducted by AWS, focusing on Healthomics and SageMaker cloud services. Participants had the opportunity to explore advanced analytics and machine learning capabilities to enhance cancer research.

## Day 2

### Lec 1: Leveraging Real-World Data and AI to Revolutionize Clinical Research: From Translational Science to Clinical Trials
**Dr Smita Agrawal**  
*ConcertAI, Bangalore*  
The integration of real-world data (RWD) and artificial intelligence (Al) has the potential to set new paradigms for innovation and efficacy in the world of clinical research. This talk explored how these cutting-edge technologies are transforming the landscape of medical research and drug development. She discussed how RWD offers a rich and nuanced perspective on patient experiences, treatment outcomes, and healthcare practices, which is invaluable for designing robust and relevant clinical trials. She also explained about the challenges and deficiencies of RWD and delve into how the transformative power of Al is helping us bridge this gap. Machine learning (ML) models and natural language processing (NLP) technologies along with Large Language Models (LLMs) not only help fill the gaps in RWD, but they also enable researchers to manage and interpret vast datasets with unprecedented accuracy and efficiency thus helping to enhance patient recruitment, optimize trial design, and personalize treatment strategies. She help us discover how the synergy of RWD and Al is revolutionizing clinical research, driving innovation from translational science to the design and execution of clinical trials, ultimately leading to improved patient outcomes and accelerated medical advancements

### Lec 2: Identifying the Seeds of Cancer Metastasis
**Dr Shruthy Suresh Aggrawal**  
*IGIB, New Delhi*  
Malignant melanomas arise from melanocytes or their neural crest progenitors. They metastasize to distal organs and drive lethality in patients. Few recurrent point mutations have been found in metastases, suggesting that transcriptional and epigenetic alterations, rather than DNA mutations, drive tumor progression. She obtained data from the AVAST-M clinical trial, in which patients with non-metastatic melanoma had their tumors profiled by RNA-seq The patients were then followed longitudinally, allowing her to identify a transcriptional signature of those that did or did not relapse with metastatic disease. To functionally interrogate this signature, she utilized the zebrafish as a model given its amenability to high throughput transgenesis and the availability of optically transparent strains such as casper.
she had used a method called Transgene Electroporation in Adult Zebrafish (TEAZ), which allows for multi-gene somatic transgenesis of melanocytes to generate melanomas within ~7 weeks in vivo. Using TEAZ, she had developed a model of primary melanoma that develops spontaneous metastasis driven by BRAFV600E and loss of tumor suppressors tp53 and pten. Her team had performed an in vivo TEAZ-based CRISPR screen of the top genes from the AVAST-M signature. This identified GRAMD18, a cholesterol transfer protein, as a bona fide metastasis suppressor. Mechanistically, loss of GRAMD1B leads to excess free cholesterol in melanoma cells. Cholesterol or its metabolite 27-hydroxycholesterol (27-HC) promotes melanoma invasiveness via activation of an AP-1 program, which is associated with increased metastasis in humans. Inhibition of 27-HC synthesis potently impairs invasion. Their data suggests that dysregulated cholesterol trafficking inside cells may be an important target in metastatic melanoma and modulating the synthesis of 27-HC may be one way of preventing relapse of high-risk disease

### Lec 3: Advances in Precision Medicine for Multiple Myeloma: Insights from Patient Subgroup Analysis and Predictive Gene Signatures
**Dr Sherry Bhalla**  
*IGIB, New Delhi*  
The complexity of multiple myeloma (MM) demands innovative approaches to improve patient outcomes. In her presentation, she highlighted two studies that advance our understanding of MM and propose novel therapeutic strategies.
Firstly, she introduced the multiomics patient similarity network (MM-PSN) for MM, which dissects the genetic and molecular landscape of the disease. Analyzing 655 patients, MM-PSN identified 12 distinct subgroups with specific genetic alterations. Her analysis emphasized that the co-occurrence of t(4,14) and 1q gain significantly raises relapse risk and shortens survival compared to.1(4;14) alone, establishing 1q gain as a critical lesion that could enhance existing staging systems (ISS and R-ISS).
The second study evaluates the efficacy of Selinexor, the first nuclear export inhibitor approved for relapsed or refractory MM. Her team had conducted RNA sequencing on CD138+ cells from 100 MM patients in the BOSTON study. Her analysis identified a gene signature predictive of Selinexor response, which was validated in an independent cohort. The genes involved were linked to altered apoptotic signaling, providing potential fargets for combination therapies.
These studies collectively provide a comprehensive understanding of MM's genetic heterogeneity, identify actionable biomarkers, and suggest novel therapeutic strategies, paving the way for personalized medicine in MM treatment.

### Lec 4: Integrating Lesion-Level Heterogeneity in Cancer Therapy Response to Redefine Efficacy and Discontinuation Criteria
**Ms Mrittika Roy**  
*Vantage Research, Chennai*  
Modelling cancer is inherently complex due to tumor pathophysiology and the dynamic interplay between tumors and the immune system. Historically, chemotherapy provided a standardized approach by targeting rapidly dividing cells systemically, and therapeutic response was often evaluated using RECIST v1.1 criteria, which categorized patients based on overall disease progression.
The emergence of immune checkpoint inhibitors (ICIs), like pembrolizumab, represents a paradigm shift in cancer therapy, leveraging the immune system to combat tumors effectively and demonstrating superior efficacy (in terms of deeper response and durability) relative to chemotherapy. However, ICis often yield heterogeneous responses across different lesions within the same individual, influenced by variations in tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Recent studies of melanoma patients treated with pembrolizumab have challenged the traditional understanding of treatment response defined by RECIST v1.1. Even among patients labeled as Progressive disease (PD) due to growth in some lesions, others lesions exhibited stabilization or regression, suggesting potential benefits from continuing therapy rather than switching treatments prematurely
This complexity underscores the limitations of relying solely on RECIST 1.1 criteria to assess treatment efficacy, highlighting the need for a systems oncology approach that incorporates lesion-level heterogeneity into clinical assessments. Such an approach is critical for refining cancer modeling strategies, optimizing therapeutic interventions, and informing more nuanced clinical decision-making

### Lec 5: Stress Sensor AMPK: A Molecular Switch in Cancer Progression
**Dr Annapoorni Rangarajan**  
*Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore*  
The AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) is a key cellular energy sensor and central metabolic regulator. A predominant notion in the field has been that the activation of the AMPK axis (LKB1/AMPK-mTORC linhibition) is tumor suppressive. Consistent with this, AMPK activation has been shown to decrease cell proliferation In contrast, work from our lab over the past decade has identified several pro-tumorigenic functions of AMPK, particularly in overcoming stresses during breast cancer progression Acquisition of anoikis-resistance is crucial for the spread of solid tumor cells through the circulation. Exploiting the mammosphere system that is enriched in stem-like cells we uncovered a novel role for AMPK in the anchorage-independent growth of breast cancer cells. More recently, she has identified AMPK as a molecular switch that governs the acquisition of EMT and stem-like states, aiding their spread to distal organs and chemo resistance. Thus, she propose AMPK inhibition as a strategy for preventing adaptive ceil-state transitions and improving therapeutic efficacy. She further discussed her efforts towards building an animal model to understand the role of AMPK in mammary gland development and cancer.

## Conclusion
The symposium provided a comprehensive overview of the latest advancements and challenges in cancer research and treatment, with a special focus on the contributions of women in the field. The diverse range of topics and hands-on workshops offered valuable insights into the integration of new technologies and methodologies in oncology.

